---
title: 'Optimal Strategies for Last Man Standing'
date: 2025-02-09
permalink: /posts/2025/02/LMS/
tags:
  - Game Theory
  - Optimal Betting Strategies
  - Modelling
---

I am currently playing Last Man Standing with my group of friends. I have thought that there should be a mathematical treatment of this problem - it seems as though there _should_ be an optimal way of playing.

In my exploration around this topic, I found [this](https://www.danialdervovic.com/2018/05/13/last-man-standing.html). This is a beautiful analysis and one I am super impressed by. There is, however, one main gripe I have with this treatment. The assumption of this model is that we should want to stay in _as long as possible_, as opposed to staying in _for the longest_. 

The Setup
=====

1. **Teams**  
   - Let there be $n$ teams in the league, labeled $1, 2, \dots, n$.
   - Each team $j$ plays a match in each gameweek (GW) $i$. We will ignore the case of double gameweeks.

2. **Players**  
   - Let there be $M$ players in the game.
   - Each player pays an entry fee of $x$ and aims to be the “last man standing.”

3. **States**  
   - After each week $i$, a player is either “alive” (if their chosen team that week won) or “eliminated” (if that team drew or lost).
   - A minimal representation of the **state** from an individual player’s perspective includes:
     - The current week index $i$.
     - The set of teams this player has **already used** in previous weeks.

4. **Actions**  
   - At the beginning of each week $i$, every **surviving** player must **choose** exactly one team $j$ that they have not chosen before.
   - If that chosen team $j$ **wins** its match in week $i$, the player survives to week $i+1$. Otherwise, the player is eliminated.

5. **Winning Probabilities**  
   - Let $p_j^{(i)}$ denote the probability that **team** $j$ wins its match in **week** $i$.

